Add the article about Scalar Quantization (#120)
qdrant/landing_page: qdrant-landing/content/articles/scalar-quantization.md

---
title: Quantized Qdrant Queries Quality
short_description: "TBD"
description: "TBD"
social_preview_image: /articles_data/scalar-quantization/social_preview.png
small_preview_image: /articles_data/scalar-quantization/quantization-icon.svg
preview_dir: /articles_data/scalar-quantization/preview
weight: 3
author: XXX
author_link: XXX
date: 2023-03-21T10:45:00+01:00
draft: false
keywords:
  - vector search
  - scalar quantization
  - TBD
---

High-dimensional vector embeddings can be memory-intensive, especially when working with 
large datasets consisting of millions of vectors. Memory footprint really starts being 

> a concern when we scale things up. A small choice of the data type used to store a single

Reviewer: maybe `small` -> `simple`?

As I understood from https://context.reverso.net/translation/english-polish/A+small+choice

It rather means a small variety of options

number impacts even billions of numbers and can drive the memory requirements crazy. The
higher the precision of your type, the more accurately you can represent the numbers. 
The more accurate your vectors, the more precise is the distance calculation. But the 
advantages stop paying off when you need to order more and more memory. 

Qdrant chose `float32` as a default type used to store the numbers of your embeddings. 
So a single number needs 4 bytes of the memory and a 512-dimensional vector occupies 
2 kB. That's only the memory used to store the vector. There is also an overhead of the
HNSW graph, so as a rule of thumb we estimate the memory size with the following formula:

```
memory_size = number_of_vectors * vector_dimension * 4 bytes * 1.5
```

While Qdrant offers various options to store some parts of the data on disk, starting
from the version 1.1.0, you can also optimize your memory by changing the data type used

> by the embeddings. We've implemented the mechanism of **Scalar Quantization**!

Reviewer: We are not exactly changing the data type of vectors. We still store original. Maybe we could say that we are compressing vectors?
Also, we improve speed as well, not only memory

Our example shows that 99% of the values come from a `[-2.0, 5.0]` range. And the 
conversion to `int8` will surely lose some precision, so we rather prefer keeping the 
representation accuracy within the range of 99% of the most probable values and ignoring
the precision of the outliers. There might be a different choice of the range width, 
actually, any value from a range `[0, 1]`, where `0` means empty range, and `1` would 
keep all the values. That's a hyperparameter of the procedure called `quantile`. A value 
of `0.95` or `0.99` is typically a reasonable choice, but in general `quantile ∈ [0, 1]`.

#### Conversion to integers

Let's talk about conversion to `int8`. Integers also have a finite set of values that
might be represented. Within a single byte they may represent up to 256 different values,
either from `[-128, 127]` or `[0, 255]`.

![Value ranges represented by int8](/articles_data/scalar-quantization/int8-value-range.png)

Since we put some boundaries on the numbers that might be represented by the `f32`, and
`i8` has some natural boundaries, the process of converting the values between those
two ranges is quite natural:

> $$ f32 = \alpha * i8 + offset $$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$ f32 = \alpha \times i8 + offset $$
```

$$ i8 = \frac{f32 - offset}{\alpha} $$

The parameters $ \alpha $ and $ offset $ has to be calculated for a given set of vectors, 
but that comes easily by putting the minimum and maximum of the represented range for 
both `f32` and `i8`. 

![Float32 to int8 conversion](/articles_data/scalar-quantization/float32-to-int8-conversion.png)

For the unsigned `int8` it will go as following:

$$ \begin{equation}

> \begin{cases} -2 = \alpha * 0 + offset \\\\ 5 = \alpha * 255 + offset \end{cases} 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\begin{cases} -2 = \alpha * 0 + offset \\\\ 5 = \alpha \times 255 + offset \end{cases} 
```

\end{equation} $$

In case of signed `int8`, we'll just change the represented range boundaries:

$$ \begin{equation}

> \begin{cases} -2 = \alpha * (-128) + offset \\\\ 5 = \alpha * 127 + offset \end{cases} 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\begin{cases} -2 = \alpha * (-128) + offset \\\\ 5 = \alpha \times 127 + offset \end{cases} 
```

\end{equation} $$

For any set of vector values we can simply calculate the $ \alpha $ and $ offset $ and 
those values have to be stored along with the collection to enable to conversion between
the types. 

#### Distance calculation

We do not store the vectors in the collections represented by `int8` instead of `float32` 
just for the sake of compressing the memory. But the coordinates are being used while we 
calculate the distance between the vectors. Both dot product and cosine distance requires 
multiplying the corresponding coordinates of two vectors, so that's the operation we 
perform quite often on `float32`. Here is how it would look like if we perform the 
conversion to `int8`:

> $$ f32 * f32' = $$
> $$ = (\alpha * i8 + offset) * (\alpha * i8' + offset) = $$
> $$ = \alpha^{2} * i8 * i8' + offset * \alpha * i8' + offset * \alpha * i8 + offset^{2} $$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$ f32 \times f32' = $$
$$ = (\alpha \times i8 + offset) \times (\alpha \times i8' + offset) = $$
$$ = \alpha^{2} * i8 * i8' + offset \times \alpha \times i8' + offset \times \alpha \times i8 + offset^{2} $$
```

> The first term, $ \alpha^{2} * i8 * i8' $ has to be calculated when we measure the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first term, $ \alpha^{2} \times i8 \times i8' $ has to be calculated when we measure the
```

distance as it depends on both vectors. However, both the second and the third term 

> ($ offset * \alpha * i8' $ and $ offset * \alpha * i8 $ respectively), depend only on a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
($ offset \times \alpha \times i8' $ and $ offset \times \alpha \times i8 $ respectively), depend only on a 
```

For the unsigned `int8` it will go as following:

$$ \begin{equation}
\begin{cases} -2 = \alpha \times 0 + offset \\\\ 5 = \alpha \times 255 + offset \end{cases} 
\end{equation} $$

In case of signed `int8`, we'll just change the represented range boundaries:

$$ \begin{equation}
\begin{cases} -2 = \alpha \times (-128) + offset \\\\ 5 = \alpha \times 127 + offset \end{cases} 
\end{equation} $$

For any set of vector values we can simply calculate the $ \alpha $ and $ offset $ and 
those values have to be stored along with the collection to enable to conversion between
the types. 

#### Distance calculation

We do not store the vectors in the collections represented by `int8` instead of `float32` 
just for the sake of compressing the memory. But the coordinates are being used while we 
calculate the distance between the vectors. Both dot product and cosine distance requires 
multiplying the corresponding coordinates of two vectors, so that's the operation we 
perform quite often on `float32`. Here is how it would look like if we perform the 
conversion to `int8`:

$$ f32 \times f32' = $$
$$ = (\alpha \times i8 + offset) \times (\alpha \times i8' + offset) = $$

> $$ = \alpha^{2} \times i8 \times i8' + offset \times \alpha \times i8' + offset \times \alpha \times i8 + offset^{2} $$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$ = \alpha^{2} \times i8 \times i8' + \underbrace{offset \times \alpha \times i8' + offset \times \alpha \times i8 + offset^{2}}_\text{pre-compute} $$```

It should look like this:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1935623/226982084-bc9e38ec-260f-4f85-a064-0659fcc7dbb9.png)

(tried to highlight individual terms as well, but MathJax could not handle this for some reason =( )

a concern when we scale things up. A simple choice of the data type used to store a single
number impacts even billions of numbers and can drive the memory requirements crazy. The
higher the precision of your type, the more accurately you can represent the numbers. 
The more accurate your vectors, the more precise is the distance calculation. But the 
advantages stop paying off when you need to order more and more memory. 

Qdrant chose `float32` as a default type used to store the numbers of your embeddings. 
So a single number needs 4 bytes of the memory and a 512-dimensional vector occupies 
2 kB. That's only the memory used to store the vector. There is also an overhead of the
HNSW graph, so as a rule of thumb we estimate the memory size with the following formula:

```
memory_size = 1.5 * number_of_vectors * vector_dimension * 4 bytes
```

While Qdrant offers various options to store some parts of the data on disk, starting 
from version 1.1.0, you can also optimize your memory by compressing the embeddings. 
We've implemented the mechanism of **Scalar Quantization**! It turns out to have not 

> only a positive impact on memory but also performance. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
only a positive impact on memory but also on the performance. 
```

a small loss of precision. 

### Theoretical background

Assume we have a collection of `float32` vectors and denote a single value as `f32`. 
In reality neural embeddings do not cover a whole range represented by the floating
point numbers, but rather a small subrange. Since we know all the other vectors, we can 
establish some statistics of all the numbers. For example, the distribution of the values 
will be typically normal:

![A distribution of the vector values](/articles_data/scalar-quantization/float32-distribution.png)

Our example shows that 99% of the values come from a `[-2.0, 5.0]` range. And the 
conversion to `int8` will surely lose some precision, so we rather prefer keeping the 
representation accuracy within the range of 99% of the most probable values and ignoring
the precision of the outliers. There might be a different choice of the range width, 
actually, any value from a range `[0, 1]`, where `0` means empty range, and `1` would 
keep all the values. That's a hyperparameter of the procedure called `quantile`. A value 
of `0.95` or `0.99` is typically a reasonable choice, but in general `quantile ∈ [0, 1]`.

#### Conversion to integers

> Let's talk about conversion to `int8`. Integers also have a finite set of values that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's talk about the conversion to `int8`. Integers also have a finite set of values that
```

perform quite often on `float32`. Here is how it would look like if we perform the 
conversion to `int8`:

$$ f32 \times f32' = $$
$$ = (\alpha \times i8 + offset) \times (\alpha \times i8' + offset) = $$
$$ = \alpha^{2} \times i8 \times i8' + \underbrace{offset \times \alpha \times i8' + offset \times \alpha \times i8 + offset^{2}}_\text{pre-compute} $$

The first term, $ \alpha^{2} \times i8 \times i8' $ has to be calculated when we measure the
distance as it depends on both vectors. However, both the second and the third term 
($ offset \times \alpha \times i8' $ and $ offset \times \alpha \times i8 $ respectively), 
depend only on a single vector and those might be precomputed and kept for each vector. 
The last term, $ offset^{2} $ does not depend on any of the values, so it might be even 
computed once and reused.

If we had to calculate all the terms to measure the distance, the performance could have 
been even worse than without the conversion. But thanks for the fact we can precompute
the majority of the terms, things are getting simpler. And in turns out the scalar 
quantization has a positive impact not only on the memory usage, but also on the 

> performance. But we did some benchmarks to back this statement!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
performance. As usual, we performed some benchmarks to support this statement!
```
